README.md, before:

<p style="text-align: center;">
    <a href="https://github.com/gardenlinux/gardenlinux/releases" target="_blank">
       <img src="https://img.shields.io/github/v/release/gardenlinux/gardenlinux?label=latest%20release" alt="latest release">
    </a>
    <a href="https://github.com/gardenlinux/gardenlinux/actions/workflows/nightly.yml" target="_blank">
        <img src="https://github.com/gardenlinux/gardenlinux/actions/workflows/nightly.yml/badge.svg?event=schedule" alt="Nightly Build">
    </a>
    <a href="https://github.com/gardenlinux/gardenlinux/actions/workflows/dev.yml" target="_blank">
        <img src="https://github.com/gardenlinux/gardenlinux/actions/workflows/dev.yml/badge.svg?branch=main" alt="Dev Build">
    </a>
    <a href="https://bestpractices.coreinfrastructure.org/projects/3925" target="_blank">
        <img src="https://bestpractices.coreinfrastructure.org/projects/3925/badge" alt="CII Best Practices">
    </a>
  </p>
</p>

# Garden Linux

<website-main>

<img align="left" width="80" height="80" src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/gardenlinux/gardenlinux/main/logo/gardenlinux-logo-black-text.svg"> <a href="https://gardenlinux.io/">Garden Linux</a> is a <a href="https://debian.org/">Debian GNU/Linux</a> derivate that aims to provide small, auditable Linux images for most cloud providers (e.g. AWS, Azure, GCP etc.) and bare-metal machines. Garden Linux is the best Linux for <a href="https://gardener.cloud/">Gardener</a> nodes. Garden Linux provides great possibilities for customizing that is made by a highly customizable feature set to fit your needs. <br><br>

</website-main>


## Features
- Easy to use build system
- Repeatable and auditable builds
- Small footprint
- Purely systemd based (network, fstab etc.)
- Initramfs is dracut generated
- Running latest LTS Kernel
- [MIT](https://github.com/gardenlinux/gardenlinux/blob/master/LICENSE.md) license
- Security
  - Fully immutable image(s) *(optional)*
  - OpenSSL 3.5 *(default)*
  - CIS Framework *(optional)*
- Testing
  - Unit tests (Created image testing)
  - Platform tests (Image platform tests in all supported platforms)
  - License violations (Testing for any license violations)
  - Outdated software versions (Testing for outdated software)
- Supporting major platforms out-of-the-box
  - Major cloud providers AWS, Azure, Google, Alicloud
  - Major virtualizer VMware, OpenStack, KVM
  - Bare-metal systems

# Build

The build system utilises the [gardenlinux/builder](https://github.com/gardenlinux/builder) to create customized Linux distributions.
[gardenlinux/gardenlinux](https://github.com/gardenlinux/gardenlinux) is maintained by the Garden Linux team, highlighting specialized "features" available for other projects.

> [!TIP]
> For further information about the build process, and how to set it up on your machine, refer to [the _Build Image_ documentation page](docs/01_developers/build_image.md).

> [!WARNING]
> Be sure to provide enough memory (at least 8GiB) to your container runtime or the VM that hosts your container runtime (in Podman or Docker Desktop).
> Otherwise your build may fail silently.

To initiate a build, use the command:
```bash
./build ${platform}-${feature1}-${feature2}-${feature3}-${arch}
```

Where:

- `${platform}` denotes the desired platform (e.g., kvm, metal, aws). It should be the first part of the flavor that is built.
- `${featureX}` represents one or more specific features from the `features/` folder. Features are appended and seperated by a hyphen `-` or (if the feature starts with an underscore `_`) by an underscore.
- `${arch}` optinally you can reference a certain architecture `amd64` or `arm64`. It should be the last part of the flavor that is built.

You can combine multiple platforms and features as needed.

Examples:
```shell
./build kvm-python_dev
./build aws-gardener_prod-amd64
```

The build script fetches the required builder container and manages all internal build steps. By default, it uses rootless podman, but you can switch to another container engine with the `--container-engine` flag.

Garden Linux images can be built with the *trustedboot* feature—an extension to *secureboot*—for enhanced system integrity; see the [trustedboot documentation](features/_trustedboot/README.md) for build instructions.
# Test

To run unit tests for a specific target, use the command `./test ${target}`.
Further documentation about tests is located in [tests/README.md](tests/README.md).

# Releases

For more information about the release strategy and lifecycle, have a look at the [Release Plan Overview](docs/00_introduction/release.md). List of releases is available in the [Public Roadmap, Theme:"Release Plan"](https://github.com/orgs/gardenlinux/projects/15/views/1?filterQuery=theme%3A%22Release+Plan%22).


## Download Stable and Patch Releases

Images are published as:
- GitHub Releses in https://github.com/gardenlinux/gardenlinux/releases
- GitHub Packages https://github.com/gardenlinux/gardenlinux/pkgs/container/gardenlinux

## Download Nightly Releases 

[Nightly](docs/00_introduction/release.md#nightly-releases) releases can be downloaded from the same sources and are either tagged or named `nightly`.

> [!WARNING]  
> Nightly releases do not include maintenance commitments and never receive updates.
> Advanced users are invited to try them out and provide feedback, but it **is strongly discouraged** to use them in any sort of production environment.

# Nvidia Driver Support
An installer can be found in the [gardenlinux/gardenlinux-nvidia-installer](https://github.com/gardenlinux/gardenlinux-nvidia-installer) repository.

# Documentation
Please refer to [docs/README.md](https://github.com/gardenlinux/gardenlinux/tree/main/docs#readme).

# Contributing

Contributions to the Garden Linux open source projects are welcome. 
More information are available in in <a href="CONTRIBUTING.md">CONTRIBUTING.md</a> and our `docs/`.

# Community
If you need further assistance, have any issues or just want to get in touch with other Garden Linux users feel free to join our public chat room on Gitter.

Link: <a href="https://gitter.im/gardenlinux/community">https://gitter.im/gardenlinux/community</a>

## Licensing

Copyright 2025 SAP SE or an SAP affiliate company and GardenLinux contributors. Please see our [LICENSE](LICENSE.md) for
copyright and license information. Detailed information including third-party components and their licensing/copyright
information is available [via the REUSE tool](https://reuse.software).

Commit message:

Create end-user docs for lima-vm
This documentation should make it a bit more visible that we offer lima-vm guests. It is based on the existing feature documentation, but revamped and a bit more prominently featured.

Fixes #2968

README.md, after:

<p style="text-align: center;">
    <a href="https://github.com/gardenlinux/gardenlinux/releases" target="_blank">
       <img src="https://img.shields.io/github/v/release/gardenlinux/gardenlinux?label=latest%20release" alt="latest release">
    </a>
    <a href="https://github.com/gardenlinux/gardenlinux/actions/workflows/nightly.yml" target="_blank">
        <img src="https://github.com/gardenlinux/gardenlinux/actions/workflows/nightly.yml/badge.svg?event=schedule" alt="Nightly Build">
    </a>
    <a href="https://github.com/gardenlinux/gardenlinux/actions/workflows/dev.yml" target="_blank">
        <img src="https://github.com/gardenlinux/gardenlinux/actions/workflows/dev.yml/badge.svg?branch=main" alt="Dev Build">
    </a>
    <a href="https://bestpractices.coreinfrastructure.org/projects/3925" target="_blank">
        <img src="https://bestpractices.coreinfrastructure.org/projects/3925/badge" alt="CII Best Practices">
    </a>
  </p>
</p>

# Garden Linux

<website-main>

<img align="left" width="80" height="80" src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/gardenlinux/gardenlinux/main/logo/gardenlinux-logo-black-text.svg"> <a href="https://gardenlinux.io/">Garden Linux</a> is a <a href="https://debian.org/">Debian GNU/Linux</a> derivate that aims to provide small, auditable Linux images for most cloud providers (e.g. AWS, Azure, GCP etc.) and bare-metal machines. Garden Linux is the best Linux for <a href="https://gardener.cloud/">Gardener</a> nodes. Garden Linux provides great possibilities for customizing that is made by a highly customizable feature set to fit your needs. <br><br>

</website-main>


## Features
- Easy to use build system
- Repeatable and auditable builds
- Small footprint
- Purely systemd based (network, fstab etc.)
- Initramfs is dracut generated
- Running latest LTS Kernel
- [MIT](https://github.com/gardenlinux/gardenlinux/blob/master/LICENSE.md) license
- Security
  - Fully immutable image(s) *(optional)*
  - OpenSSL 3.5 *(default)*
  - CIS Framework *(optional)*
- Testing
  - Unit tests (Created image testing)
  - Platform tests (Image platform tests in all supported platforms)
  - License violations (Testing for any license violations)
  - Outdated software versions (Testing for outdated software)
- Supporting major platforms out-of-the-box
  - Major cloud providers AWS, Azure, Google, Alicloud
  - Major virtualizer VMware, OpenStack, KVM
  - Bare-metal systems

# Build

The build system utilises the [gardenlinux/builder](https://github.com/gardenlinux/builder) to create customized Linux distributions.
[gardenlinux/gardenlinux](https://github.com/gardenlinux/gardenlinux) is maintained by the Garden Linux team, highlighting specialized "features" available for other projects.

> [!TIP]
> For further information about the build process, and how to set it up on your machine, refer to [the _Build Image_ documentation page](docs/01_developers/build_image.md).

> [!WARNING]
> Be sure to provide enough memory (at least 8GiB) to your container runtime or the VM that hosts your container runtime (in Podman or Docker Desktop).
> Otherwise your build may fail silently.

To initiate a build, use the command:
```bash
./build ${platform}-${feature1}-${feature2}-${feature3}-${arch}
```

Where:

- `${platform}` denotes the desired platform (e.g., kvm, metal, aws). It should be the first part of the flavor that is built.
- `${featureX}` represents one or more specific features from the `features/` folder. Features are appended and seperated by a hyphen `-` or (if the feature starts with an underscore `_`) by an underscore.
- `${arch}` optinally you can reference a certain architecture `amd64` or `arm64`. It should be the last part of the flavor that is built.

You can combine multiple platforms and features as needed.

Examples:
```shell
./build kvm-python_dev
./build aws-gardener_prod-amd64
```

The build script fetches the required builder container and manages all internal build steps. By default, it uses rootless podman, but you can switch to another container engine with the `--container-engine` flag.

Garden Linux images can be built with the *trustedboot* feature—an extension to *secureboot*—for enhanced system integrity; see the [trustedboot documentation](features/_trustedboot/README.md) for build instructions.
# Test

To run unit tests for a specific target, use the command `./test ${target}`.
Further documentation about tests is located in [tests/README.md](tests/README.md).

# Releases

For more information about the release strategy and lifecycle, have a look at the [Release Plan Overview](docs/00_introduction/release.md). List of releases is available in the [Public Roadmap, Theme:"Release Plan"](https://github.com/orgs/gardenlinux/projects/15/views/1?filterQuery=theme%3A%22Release+Plan%22).


## Download Stable and Patch Releases

Images are published as:
- GitHub Releses in https://github.com/gardenlinux/gardenlinux/releases
- GitHub Packages https://github.com/gardenlinux/gardenlinux/pkgs/container/gardenlinux

## Download Nightly Releases 

[Nightly](docs/00_introduction/release.md#nightly-releases) releases can be downloaded from the same sources and are either tagged or named `nightly`.

> [!WARNING]  
> Nightly releases do not include maintenance commitments and never receive updates.
> Advanced users are invited to try them out and provide feedback, but it **is strongly discouraged** to use them in any sort of production environment.

# Nvidia Driver Support
An installer can be found in the [gardenlinux/gardenlinux-nvidia-installer](https://github.com/gardenlinux/gardenlinux-nvidia-installer) repository.

# Run Garden Linux Virtual Machines Locally Using Lima (Linux Machines)

You can run Garden Linux virtual machines on your laptop easily using [Lima (Linux Machines)](https://lima-vm.io).
This can be useful if you want to evaluate Garden Linux but don't have access to Cloud accounts.

To get started, follow the [lima install instructions](https://lima-vm.io/docs/installation/) for your OS and create a Garden Linux vm using this command:

```bash
limactl start --name gardenlinux https://images.gardenlinux.io/gardenlinux.yaml
```

# Documentation
Please refer to [docs/README.md](https://github.com/gardenlinux/gardenlinux/tree/main/docs#readme).

# Contributing

Contributions to the Garden Linux open source projects are welcome. 
More information are available in in <a href="CONTRIBUTING.md">CONTRIBUTING.md</a> and our `docs/`.

# Community
If you need further assistance, have any issues or just want to get in touch with other Garden Linux users feel free to join our public chat room on Gitter.

Link: <a href="https://gitter.im/gardenlinux/community">https://gitter.im/gardenlinux/community</a>

## Licensing

Copyright 2025 SAP SE or an SAP affiliate company and GardenLinux contributors. Please see our [LICENSE](LICENSE.md) for
copyright and license information. Detailed information including third-party components and their licensing/copyright
information is available [via the REUSE tool](https://reuse.software).
