docs/01_developers/ocm/oci-implementation-specification.md, before:

# OCI Implementation Specification


## Key Concepts
* [Reference by tags](#concept%3A-reference-by-tag)
* [Common artefact storage](#concept%3A-common-artefact-storage)
* [Linking coherent components](#concept%3A-linking-coherent-components)
* [Extensible with OCM](#concept%3A-extensible-with-ocm)


### Concept: Reference by tag

To make the OCI registry usable for automation and manual downloads, we assign tags to each object uploaded to the OCI registry.
We make use of a hierarchical folder structure that implements the general structure described in the [High Level Design (HLD)](high-level-design.md).


### Concept: Common Artefact Storage 

This OCI registry is the entry point to discover and download any artefacts from the Garden Linux ecosystem. 

### Concept: Linking coherent components

OCI artefacts can reference other OCI artefacts within or outside the OCI registry by tag, digest or foreign URL.

The structure described in the [HLD](high-level-design.md) defines the relations between the Garden Linux artefacts stored in the OCI registry.

### Concept: Extensible with OCM

OCM implementation is described in the [OCM Implementation Specification](ocm-implementation-specification.md).
Objects from the OCI registry can be referenced via their respective container image reference (including tag or digest),
for example `ghcr.io/gardenlinux/gardenlinux:1473.0` 


## Implementation Details

An OCI artifact consists of a manifest, which describes the artifact's layers and configuration, and optionally, annotations.
The manifest points to the artifact's layers (the payload) and may reference other related OCI artifacts through descriptors.

### Payload - the artifact layer

### annotations
[oci image spec: annotations](https://github.com/opencontainers/image-spec/blob/main/annotations.md)



### descriptors
[oci image spec: descriptors](https://github.com/opencontainers/image-spec/blob/main/descriptor.md)

## Clients

### ORAS cli 

#### Upload 

#### Download 

#### Read references (Links to internal or external artefacts) 


### GitHub Actions 
We implement re-usable GitHub actions that can be used for automation in our GitHub Pipelines. 

#### Download 

It can be a helpful to be able to download artefacts from OCI in a GitHub actions step.
This allows to easily discover and download the correct container image for a given task (e.g. test container). 


```yaml
name: 'Download Artifact from OCI Registry'
description: 'Downloads an artifact from an OCI registry using a tag'
inputs:
  tag_name:
    description: 'Tag name of the artifact to download'
    required: true
  registry_url:
    description: 'OCI Registry URL (e.g., myregistry.io/myapp)'
    required: true
  output_path:
    description: 'Path to save the downloaded artifact'
    required: true

runs:
  using: 'composite'
  steps:
    - name: Login to OCI Registry
      run: echo "${{ secrets.REGISTRY_PASSWORD }}" | oras login --username ${{ secrets.REGISTRY_USERNAME }} --password-stdin ${{ inputs.registry_url }}
      shell: bash

    - name: Download Artifact
      run: oras pull -a -o ${{ inputs.output_path }} ${{ inputs.registry_url }}:${{ inputs.tag_name }}
      shell: bash

    - name: Logout from OCI Registry
      run: oras logout ${{ inputs.registry_url }}
      shell: bash

```

And it can be used like this:

```yaml
jobs:
  download-artifact:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    steps:
      - name: Checkout code
        uses: actions/checkout@v2
      
      - name: Download OCI Artifact
        uses: ./.github/actions/download-from-oci@main
        with:
          tag_name: 'v1.0.0'
          registry_url: 'myregistry.io/myapp'
          output_path: './path/for/artifact'
        env:
          REGISTRY_USERNAME: ${{ secrets.REGISTRY_USERNAME }}
          REGISTRY_PASSWORD: ${{ secrets.REGISTRY_PASSWORD }}

```

#### Upload
Automated uploads are mandatory for the Garden Linux OCI framework. For this, we use re-usable github actions. 

```yaml
name: Upload Artifact to OCI Registry

on:
  workflow_call:
    inputs:
      artifact_path:
        description: 'Path to the artifact file to upload'
        required: true
        type: string
      tag_name:
        description: 'Tag name to assign to the uploaded artifact'
        required: true
        type: string
      registry_url:
        description: 'OCI Registry URL (e.g., myregistry.io/myapp)'
        required: true
        type: string

jobs:
  upload:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    name: Upload to OCI Registry
    steps:
      - name: Checkout code
        uses: actions/checkout@v3

      - name: Login to OCI Registry
        run: echo ${{ secrets.REGISTRY_PASSWORD }} | oras login --username ${{ secrets.REGISTRY_USERNAME }} --password-stdin ${{ inputs.registry_url }}
      
      - name: Upload Artifact
        run: oras push ${{ inputs.registry_url }}:${{ inputs.tag_name }} ${{ inputs.artifact_path }}

      - name: Logout from OCI Registry
        run: oras logout ${{ inputs.registry_url }}
```

And it can be used like this:
```yaml
name: Example Usage Workflow

on: [push]

jobs:
  call-upload-workflow:
    uses: ./.github/workflows/upload-to-oci.yml@main
    with:
      artifact_path: './path/to/your/artifact/file.tar.gz'
      tag_name: 'v1.0.0'
      registry_url: 'myregistry.io/myapp'
    secrets:
      REGISTRY_USERNAME: ${{ secrets.REGISTRY_USERNAME }}
      REGISTRY_PASSWORD: ${{ secrets.REGISTRY_PASSWORD }}
```

Commit message:

add more references to spec

docs/01_developers/ocm/oci-implementation-specification.md, after:

# OCI Implementation Specification


## Key Concepts
* [Reference by tags](#concept%3A-reference-by-tag)
* [Common artefact storage](#concept%3A-common-artefact-storage)
* [Linking coherent components](#concept%3A-linking-coherent-components)
* [Extensible with OCM](#concept%3A-extensible-with-ocm)


### Concept: Reference by tag

To make the OCI registry usable for automation and manual downloads, we assign tags to each object uploaded to the OCI registry.
We make use of a hierarchical folder structure that implements the general structure described in the [High Level Design (HLD)](high-level-design.md).


### Concept: Common Artefact Storage 

This OCI registry is the entry point to discover and download any artefacts from the Garden Linux ecosystem. 

### Concept: Linking coherent components

OCI artefacts can reference other OCI artefacts within or outside the OCI registry by tag, digest or foreign URL.

The structure described in the [HLD](high-level-design.md) defines the relations between the Garden Linux artefacts stored in the OCI registry.

### Concept: Extensible with OCM

OCM implementation is described in the [OCM Implementation Specification](ocm-implementation-specification.md).
Objects from the OCI registry can be referenced via their respective container image reference (including tag or digest),
for example `ghcr.io/gardenlinux/gardenlinux:1473.0` 


## Implementation Details

The [oci image-spec](https://github.com/opencontainers/image-spec) describes the standardized oci image format. 
We utilize this specification to upload any Garden Linux artefact as we design. 

The following sub-sections describe how we utilize the oci-image format to achieve the concepts mentioned above to implement the structure defined in the [HLD](high-level-design).

### Layer 
[oci image spec: layer](https://github.com/opencontainers/image-spec/blob/main/layer.md)

### manifest
[oci image spec: manifest](https://github.com/opencontainers/image-spec/blob/main/manifest.md)

### annotations
[oci image spec: annotations](https://github.com/opencontainers/image-spec/blob/main/annotations.md)

### descriptors
[oci image spec: descriptors](https://github.com/opencontainers/image-spec/blob/main/descriptor.md)

## Clients

Above we described the OCI registry, how it is internally structured. This section is dedicated to define how the OCI registry can be accessed via clients.

### ORAS cli 

#### Upload 

#### Download 

#### Read references (Links to internal or external artefacts) 


### GitHub Actions 
We implement re-usable GitHub actions that can be used for automation in our GitHub Pipelines. 

#### Download 

It can be a helpful to be able to download artefacts from OCI in a GitHub actions step.
This allows to easily discover and download the correct container image for a given task (e.g. test container). 


```yaml
name: 'Download Artifact from OCI Registry'
description: 'Downloads an artifact from an OCI registry using a tag'
inputs:
  tag_name:
    description: 'Tag name of the artifact to download'
    required: true
  registry_url:
    description: 'OCI Registry URL (e.g., myregistry.io/myapp)'
    required: true
  output_path:
    description: 'Path to save the downloaded artifact'
    required: true

runs:
  using: 'composite'
  steps:
    - name: Login to OCI Registry
      run: echo "${{ secrets.REGISTRY_PASSWORD }}" | oras login --username ${{ secrets.REGISTRY_USERNAME }} --password-stdin ${{ inputs.registry_url }}
      shell: bash

    - name: Download Artifact
      run: oras pull -a -o ${{ inputs.output_path }} ${{ inputs.registry_url }}:${{ inputs.tag_name }}
      shell: bash

    - name: Logout from OCI Registry
      run: oras logout ${{ inputs.registry_url }}
      shell: bash

```

And it can be used like this:

```yaml
jobs:
  download-artifact:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    steps:
      - name: Checkout code
        uses: actions/checkout@v2
      
      - name: Download OCI Artifact
        uses: ./.github/actions/download-from-oci@main
        with:
          tag_name: 'v1.0.0'
          registry_url: 'myregistry.io/myapp'
          output_path: './path/for/artifact'
        env:
          REGISTRY_USERNAME: ${{ secrets.REGISTRY_USERNAME }}
          REGISTRY_PASSWORD: ${{ secrets.REGISTRY_PASSWORD }}

```

#### Upload
Automated uploads are mandatory for the Garden Linux OCI framework. For this, we use re-usable github actions. 

```yaml
name: Upload Artifact to OCI Registry

on:
  workflow_call:
    inputs:
      artifact_path:
        description: 'Path to the artifact file to upload'
        required: true
        type: string
      tag_name:
        description: 'Tag name to assign to the uploaded artifact'
        required: true
        type: string
      registry_url:
        description: 'OCI Registry URL (e.g., myregistry.io/myapp)'
        required: true
        type: string

jobs:
  upload:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    name: Upload to OCI Registry
    steps:
      - name: Checkout code
        uses: actions/checkout@v3

      - name: Login to OCI Registry
        run: echo ${{ secrets.REGISTRY_PASSWORD }} | oras login --username ${{ secrets.REGISTRY_USERNAME }} --password-stdin ${{ inputs.registry_url }}
      
      - name: Upload Artifact
        run: oras push ${{ inputs.registry_url }}:${{ inputs.tag_name }} ${{ inputs.artifact_path }}

      - name: Logout from OCI Registry
        run: oras logout ${{ inputs.registry_url }}
```

And it can be used like this:
```yaml
name: Example Usage Workflow

on: [push]

jobs:
  call-upload-workflow:
    uses: ./.github/workflows/upload-to-oci.yml@main
    with:
      artifact_path: './path/to/your/artifact/file.tar.gz'
      tag_name: 'v1.0.0'
      registry_url: 'myregistry.io/myapp'
    secrets:
      REGISTRY_USERNAME: ${{ secrets.REGISTRY_USERNAME }}
      REGISTRY_PASSWORD: ${{ secrets.REGISTRY_PASSWORD }}
```
