features/gcp/README.md, before:

## Feature: gcp
### Description
<website-feature>
This platform feature creates an artifact for the Google Cloud Platform.
</website-feature>

### Features
This feature creates a GCP compatible image artifact as an `.raw` file.

To be platform complaint smaller adjustments like defining the platform related clocksource config, networking config etc. are done.
The artifact includes `cloud-init` and `amazon-ec2-utils` for orchestrating the image.

### Uploading Image to GCP

- create compressed tar image (disk must be called disk.raw)

```tar --format=oldgnu -Sczf compressed-image.tar.gz disk.raw```

- upload tar:

```gsutil cp compressed-image.tar.gz gs://garden-linux-test```

- create image:

```gcloud compute images create garden-linux-gcp-01 --source-uri gs://garden-linux-test/compressed-image.tar.gz```

### Unit testing
This platform feature supports unit testing and is based on the `gcp` fixture to validate the applied changes according its feature configuration.

### Meta
|||
|---|---|
|type|platform|
|artifact|`.raw`|
|included_features|cloud|
|excluded_features|None|

Commit message:

Fix/use gcp guest configs from google 1592 (#2860)
* fix: subscribe to udev rules from google upstream configs

Google provides up-to-date guest-configs that include those NVMe rules in https://github.com/GoogleCloudPlatform/guest-configs.

We create a package for this configuration in
https://github.com/gardenlinux/package-google-compute-engine

Outdated files in features/gcp/file.include are removed in favor of files installed from new
package-google-compute-engine.

* keep 64-gce-disk-removal.rules

* document gcp configs source

* update action/cache action in build workflow

* use 1592.7 apt

* features/ssh/test/test_sshd: update to latest KexAlgorithms (#2374)

The KexAlgorithms sntrup761x25519-sha512 and mlkem768x25519-sha256
are enabled by default in openssh 9.9p1.
https://metadata.ftp-master.debian.org/changelogs//main/o/openssh/openssh_9.9p1-1_changelog

---------

Co-authored-by: Eike Waldt <waldt@b1-systems.de>

features/gcp/README.md, after:

## Feature: gcp
### Description
<website-feature>
This platform feature creates an artifact for the Google Cloud Platform.
</website-feature>

### Features
This feature creates a GCP compatible image artifact as an `.raw` file.

To be platform complaint smaller adjustments like defining the platform related clocksource config, networking config etc. are done.
The artifact includes `cloud-init` and `amazon-ec2-utils` for orchestrating the image.

This feature installs google cloud configurations via the https://github.com/GoogleCloudPlatform/guest-configs package.

### Uploading Image to GCP

- create compressed tar image (disk must be called disk.raw)

```tar --format=oldgnu -Sczf compressed-image.tar.gz disk.raw```

- upload tar:

```gsutil cp compressed-image.tar.gz gs://garden-linux-test```

- create image:

```gcloud compute images create garden-linux-gcp-01 --source-uri gs://garden-linux-test/compressed-image.tar.gz```

### Unit testing
This platform feature supports unit testing and is based on the `gcp` fixture to validate the applied changes according its feature configuration.

### Meta
|||
|---|---|
|type|platform|
|artifact|`.raw`|
|included_features|cloud|
|excluded_features|None|
